---
title: "Quantum Computing via Ion Trapping"
description: "seminar report for Advanced Topics of Quantum Computing"
date: 2022-05-22
pdf: "/posts/ion-trap-qcs.pdf"
---

# Introduction

The mathematical framework for quantum computing has existed since the
twentieth century, when it was developed by some of the most notable
physicists of the time. However, the most noticeable stimulus for
research in quantum computing occurred after both Paul Benioff
introduced the quantum-mechanical based Turing Machine [@Benioff1980],
and Richard Feynman consequently argued that these systems could be
capable of simulating the intrinsic physical properties of nature
[@Feynman1982], something classical systems could not achieve. From
there, the field saw some noticeable advancements: Peter Shor's prime
factorization algorithm [@doi:10.1137/S0097539795293172], Lov Grover's
search problem solver [@Grover1996], and many more.

Nevertheless, this all remains mainly theoretical research since no
completely capable quantum computer (QC) has been built. A plethora of
ideas have been introduced into how to actually build them, with some of
the most prominent being the use of superconducting qubits
[@Clarke2008][@kaminsky2004scalable] (currently the approach being used
by Google [@Arute2019]), quantum dot-based computers
[@PhysRevLett.83.4204] and, finally, the use of cold-trapped ion's
internal state as the base for the quantum bits [@PhysRevLett.74.4091].
With the last method, first introduced in 1995 by Cirac and Zoller,
being one of the pioneering papers for the physical realization of a QC
and will be the focus of discussion throughout this seminar report.

Of course, the fact that so many ideas have been proposed, is nothing
but evidence for how relatively young this field is. Anyhow, we are
witnessing an increased investment both academically and industrially
[@Gibney2019] which reflects the potential this technology has in
solving key present day challenges. McKinsey and Company further state
that use cases for quantum computing are starting to become realistic
for companies in specialized fields
[@biondi_heid_henke_mohr_pautasso_ostojic_wester_zemmel_2022], which
illustrates that a \"quantum world\" might be closer than we think.

# Background

## Ions

An ion is an atom or molecule where the electronic structure is not
identically distributed between protons and electrons. Specifically, by
gaining or losing an electron, the particle gains a net charge in a
process called ionization.

In particular, by shining a laser with sufficient energy on an atom, we
can effectively force it to drop a specific number of electrons thus
becoming an ion. This process is called ionization and the energy
required for the process is known for a specific atom/number of
electrons pair.

## Ion traps

First, we need to isolate the ion such that other particles do not
interfere with the very delicate conditions for ion trapping. This is,
naturally, done via vacuum chambers encasing the trapping device. Any
interaction with the system is, therefore, accomplished with optical and
electrical signals.

Furthermore, we should consider that the Coulomb force
[\[eq:coulomb\]](#eq:coulomb) is in effect here: particles with
differently-signed charges will attract each other, while equally-signed
particles will be mutually repelled [@noauthor_2017-et].

$$F_1 = \frac{q_1q_2}{4\pi\epsilon_0}\frac{r_1-r_2}{\lvert r_1 - r_2\rvert^3}$$

From there, one might hope that encasing the particle with positively
charged electrodes (assuming a positively charged ion) will confine it
indefinitely. However, due to Earnshaw's theorem
[@cambridge1842transactions], we know it is impossible to contain a
stationary particle in equilibrium resourcing only to the electrostatic
interaction of charges.

Therefore, for this particular problem, we should resource to a
dynamical electrical field.

### Traditional Paul traps

In 1990, German physicist Wolfgang Paul, proposed a device with a
similar arrangement [@RevModPhys.62.531], but that repeatedly alternates
between electrical field configurations to, successfully, confine the
ions.

Suppose we continue to surround the particles with electrodes in all
axes. A linear Paul trap fixes one axis with a positive voltage. This is
done via two cone-shaped electrodes, named Endcap electrodes.
Surrounding the particle in the other axes are rectangular-shaped
electrodes named Blade electrodes. Each pair contains an opposite charge
so that the ion is always attracted to two of the electrodes.

In static conditions, this creates an electrical field with a saddle
shape, where the particle is drawn to the negative charge. However, if
we rotate the electric field with sufficient frequency, such that the
rotation is faster than the attraction of the particle, we can
effectively, and periodically, draw the particle to different blades
such that it remains confined in a sphere of arbitrary radius.

In practice, the rotation of the electrical field could be done by
physically rotating the device, but it is much easier to apply
differently signed voltages to each pair of blade electrodes in a
oscillating fashion. Effectively rotating the electrical field with a
certain frequency.

Furthermore, given that a collection of ions also suffer from Coulomb's
law, it is possible to engineer a trapping device that is able to
confine them simultaneously [@RevModPhys.62.531].

<figure id="fig:paul-trap">
  <img
    src="/images/The-canonical-four-rod-Paul-trap-has-been-a-workhorse-for-early-demonstrations-of-QIP.png"
    style="width:100mm"
  />
  <figcaption>
    a) The traditional linear Paul trap, composed of four blade electrodes and
    two endcap electrodes confining a string of ions. A laser beam shines on an
    ion illustrating the application of a single qubit gate. b) Photographs of
    actual ions confined in a Paul trap. Adapted from{" "}
    <span class="citation" data-cites="Eltony2016"></span>.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

### Planar Paul traps

It seems obvious to us, a generation with classical processors in the
nanometer scale, that any device that requires scale and engineering
precision would benefit from microfabrication processes. Of course, this
applies to quantum processors as well. The description for transitioning
from the traditional Paul trap to a microchip has been published since
around 2006 [@PhysRevLett.96.253003], and the field has seen some
remarkable advancements since then. Namely, in terms of modularity of
the chip and the capability of moving ions around [@Blakestad2009].

<figure id="fig:planar">
  <img src="/images/planar.jpeg" style="width:100mm" />
  <figcaption>
    An example of an ion trap based on a semiconductor chip. The ions sitting
    above it are a zoomed in picture of 80{" "}
    <span class="math inline">
      <sup>171</sup>
    </span>
    Yb
    <span class="math inline">
      <sup>+</sup>
    </span>{" "}
    ions glowing. Adapted from <span class="citation" data-cites="Monroe2019"></span>
    .
  </figcaption>
</figure>

However, some new challenges arise when this manufacturing scale is
considered, especially regarding the addressing and heating of
individual trapped ions [@Ivory2021].

# How do we build a quantum computer?

When we discuss what aspects are necessary to construct a Quantum
Computer, we have to refer to DiVicenzo's criteria [@DiVincenzo2000]. He
states that for any physical implementation to be successful, it must
fulfill five (plus two) criteria:

- Scalability with well-defined qubits

- Initializing qubits to a simple fiducial state

- Long relevant decoherence times

- A \"universal\" set of quantum gates

- A qubit specific measurement capability

The last two criteria are: interconverting stationary and flying qubits
and faithfully transmitting flying qubits between specified locations.
However, these only apply when quantum communication is being considered
and, since a physical implementation of QC is a landmark achievement by
itself, those are not going to be discussed in this report.

## Qubits

Taking into account that atoms have naturally occurring vibrations that
differ according to their energy level, it's only natural that we can
leverage them to form the quantum states. Cirac and Zoller proposed
using a particle's energy ground state as $\ket{0}$ and it's excited
state as $\ket{1}$. Therefore, when we dwell upon the string of $N$ ions
present in a ion trap at a particular time, we find a macroscopic
superposition of possible states [eq:superposition]

$$
\ket{\Psi} = \sum_{x=0}^{2^N-1} c_x \ket{x}
$$

Each possible state is associated with a coefficient $c_x$ akin to the
probability of the QC being in the specific state. Moreover, $x$
corresponds to the binary decomposition of a particular number and,
since each ion can be targeted with lasers, the preparation and readout
of states can be done in a simple manner as we'll see in a further
section.

Furthermore, in this modality of quantum computers, we can either have
optical or hyperfine qubits. They differ only in what is considered the
excited state: for the optical qubit, $\ket{1}$ is a meta-stable excited
state; whereas, in hyperfine qubits, $\ket{1}$ is the first excited
level above the ground state.

## Fiducial state

In layman's terms, this means that the state of the QC must be known
before computation begins, such that it's results are trustworthy.
Keeping in mind that every state can be obtained starting from an
initial, low energy, $\ket{0}$ state [@nielsen00]. This equates to the
most common approach in initializing the quantum registers. From there,
physicists prepare the desired state by applying a sequence of quantum
gates as needed.

Now, we should consider how to actually prepare the initial state. As
discussed before, we regard $\ket{0}$ as the ground energy level in a
particular atom. Moreover, the overall string of ions confined has to be
set to it's lowest energy level, this ensures the computation results
are trustworthy as it is the base for the Cirac-Zoller gate we will soon
introduce.

The ground state is achieved with extreme cooling procedures, namely,
the one mentioned in the original article, sideband cooling
[@PhysRevLett.62.403]. Essentially, when a laser is tuned specifically
to the red sideband frequency of a particular atom, it inflicts a
transition from a lower energy level to an excited state, simultaneously
reducing the motional state of the atom by one discrete level. However,
the energy absorbed is subsequently released in the form of a photon,
resulting in the net effect of lowering its energy and motional level to
the lowest possible discrete state with high probability if the
procedure is repeated to a sufficient degree [@Schliesser2008].

In other words, with this method it is possible to reliably prepare a
complete $\ket{0}$ state, both in terms of the electronic state of every
individual ion and the overall motional level of the oscillating system.

## Decoherence time

One of the main benefits in building quantum computers with ion-trapping
technology is that the decoherence time of states is relatively high
when compared to other solutions. With this method, decoherence between
the expected state of a qubit and its actual state occurs due to the
interaction of the ions with the surrounding environment, since
collisions between atoms and interactions with naturally occurring
electric fields are bound to happen. Furthermore, we should also mention
the spontaneous emission of energy in excited particles, leading to the
decay of a particle into a lower energy level.

However, there are techniques, and evidence to support they work, that
suppress most of these concerns. Regarding the storage of the delicate
quantum information, by encasing the system in a vacuum chamber, we
remove most of the possibilities for the system to interact with
neighboring particles and electrical fields, thus preserving its
intrinsic structure.

On the other hand, spontaneous emission of energy is mainly a non-factor
in some specific ions, since the excited state used for $\ket{1}$ is
relatively stable and is able to stay intact for the lifetime of most
computations [@Garg1996]. In particular, in 1997, for the $^{171}$Yb$^+$
ion, coherence times of more than 10 minutes have been measured
[@Fisk1997].

## Quantum Gates

Initially, we should start by addressing the fact that any gate can be
constructed with single-qubit gates and an arbitrary 2-qubit gate
[@Divincenzo_1994], thus forming a universal set of quantum gates.
Therefore, a natural limitation in how to build a QC is how to achieve a
working 2-qubit gate, something that requires \"communication\" between
two particles.

### Single qubit gates

Consider the interpretation of single qubit gates as rotations on the
block sphere. We know from the Z-Y decomposition that an arbitrary 2x2
matrix can be decomposed into $R_z$ and $R_y$ rotations with specific
real valued angles [@nielsen00]. Furthermore, since each ion is
addressable with correctly tuned lasers, we'll discuss that any rotation
can be performed and, therefore, the transition from a electronic ground
state to each possible state is theoretically possible [@nielsen00].

Specifically, the tuning of the lasers depends on the ion in question.
For instance, the use of a resonant frequency should oscillate between
the two electronic states being used as $\ket{0}$ and $\ket{1}$
[@inproceedings]. Going even further, since an atom makes up for a two
level system and, when subject to an oscillatory driving field such as a
laser, it oscillates between its states according to a specific innate
frequency called the Rabi frequency [@Band2013].

<figure id="fig:oscillation of states">
  <img
    src="/images/Carrier-Rabi-oscillations-of-a-single-4-0-Ca-Each-data-point-represents-the-average.ppm.png"
    style="width:55mm"
  />
  <figcaption>
    Carrier Rabi Oscillations of a{" "}
    <span class="math inline">
      <sup>40</sup>
    </span>
    Ca
    <span class="math inline">
      <sup>+</sup>
    </span>{" "}
    ion. Each sample is the average measurement after 1000 experiments, given a
    specific amount of time where the ion was subjected to a laser. Adapted from{" "}
    <span class="citation" data-cites="inproceedings"></span>.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

On the other hand, tuning the pulse length and phase results in a
rotation of arbitrary accuracy [@inproceedings], as described in
[\[eq:rotation\]](#eq:rotation){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:rotation"}. Making it that a rotation on the Bloch sphere
is akin to subjecting a ion to a particular laser configuration.

$$R(\theta, \phi) = \exp(i\theta/2(e^{i\phi}\sigma_+ + e^{-i\phi}\sigma_-))$$

Interpreting figure [4](#fig:change of phase){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:change of phase"}: in a), a pulse of length $\pi$ and $0$
relative phase to the Rabi frequency shines upon the atom, this equates
to a rotation around the x-axis on the Bloch sphere according to the
right-hand rule; when the phase is switched by $\pi/2$, we can interpret
this as a rotation around the y axis; therefore, when projecting on the
z axis for measurement, the switching of phase has no visible effect.

Regarding b), something very similar occurs, but the switching of phase
happens when the atom is in a superposition state. Specifically, the
atom is positioned at the intersection of the y-axis and the Bloch
sphere, therefore, a rotation around y does nothing. With that in mind,
during this period, a projection of the atom on the z axis appears to be
constant relative to time.

<figure id="fig:change of phase">
  <img
    src="/images/Single-qubit-rotations-In-a-the-black-dots-show-the-population-evolution-during-the.png"
    style="width:110mm"
  />
  <figcaption>
    Illustration of single qubit rotations. a) shows the measurements during the
    pulse sequence{" "}
    <span class="math inline">
      <em>R</em>(<em>π</em>,0)<em>R</em>(2<em>π</em>,<em>π</em>/2)<em>R</em>(
      <em>π</em>,0)
    </span>
    . b) shows the measurements for the pulse sequence{" "}
    <span class="math inline">
      <em>R</em>(3<em>π</em>/2,0)<em>R</em>(<em>π</em>,<em>π</em>/2)<em>R</em>(3
      <em>π</em>/2,0)
    </span>
    in red and the regular Rabi oscillations in blue. Adapted from <span
      class="citation"
      data-cites="inproceedings"
    ></span>.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

Moreover, the physical implementation of single qubit gates in ion traps
has been shown to be accurate up to a certain degree
[@PhysRevA.84.030303], but the accuracy threshold for reliable quantum
computing has not yet been achieved [@Preskill1998]. More specifically,
the rate at which errors occur when we perform a specific gate has to be
extremely smaller than the rate at which computations are performed.

### Cirac-Zoller CNOT gate

The key idea introduced in the original and pioneering article.
Foremost, note that a cNOT gate can be achieved with the Hadamard and
Controlled-Z gates [@nielsen00]. Therefore, since we've discussed how
the Hadamard is implemented as a single-qubit gate, the novel idea is
how a Controlled-Z gate works in practice.

![alt text](/images/CNOT.png "Constructing a cNOT gate from the Controlled-Z and Hadamard gates")

To start with, we'll remind the reader that the ions confined in the
trapping device suffer from Coulomb's Force and therefore are
equidistant from each other along one of the axis. Moreover, since
they've been sufficiently cooled per assumption, a laser targeting a
particular ion can only affect the atom's internal energy state and the
overall chain's motion [@Wineland1998]. The latter is accomplished by
detuning the laser from the internal transition by a predetermined
amount of energy.

Additionally, since the chain's center of mass (CM) motion is induced
from the control ion's quantum information, we can consider this
particular motion of the ion chain an auxiliary quantum state. In fact,
the motion of the chain has several possible states. However, one of the
preconditions for this experiment is achieving the Lamb-Dicke regime, in
which transitions larger than one quantum of motion are generally
suppressed.

With these two ingredients, the first step in the Controlled-Z gate is
the transferring of information from the control qubit to the chain's CM
motion. As mentioned before we can force the transition
$\ket{e}\ket{0} \longrightarrow \ket{g}\ket{1}$ with a proper
polarization of the laser field and, in fact, this suffices to complete
the information transfer, see
[\[eq:transfer\]](#eq:transfer).

$$
(a\ket{g} + b\ket{e}) \ket{0} = a\ket{g}\ket{0} + b\ket{e}\ket{0} \longrightarrow a\ket{g}\ket{0} + b\ket{g}\ket{1} = \ket{g} (a\ket{0} + b\ket{1})
$$

Lastly, we can choose a laser polarization such that it drives a
transition on the target ion only if the auxiliary state is $\ket{1}$.
Therefore making it possible to establish communication between two
separate atoms through the chain's CM motion.

Essentially, putting everything together: a laser targets ion $m$,
transferring its internal energy state to the motion of the chain; from
there, a second laser targeting ion $n$ only has an effect if the
chain's state is $\ket{1}$; finally, a similarly tuned laser as in the
first step is shined upon the first ion, restoring both it and the
overall chain's original states, while simultaneously inducing a $-1$
phase on ion $n$, depending on the original state of ion $m$.
Effectively, completing a Controlled-Z gate. The overall unitary
operator for this experiment is
[\[eq:unitaryop\]] as per the original paper
[@PhysRevLett.74.4091], which delves into more detail on how it should
be derived.

$$\hat{U}_m^{k,q}(\phi) = \exp[-ik\frac{\pi}{2}(\ket{e_q}_n\bra{g}ae^{-i\phi}+ H.c.)$$

Furthermore, we can observe the evolution of the system in
[\[eq:czgate\]](#eq:czgate){reference-type="eqref"
reference="eq:czgate"} exhausting the possible configurations it may
have.

<img src={/images/Screenshot_20230709_165707.png} alt="Image alt"/>

As a last note, the first successful realization of the Cirac-Zoller
gate was completed in 2003 [@SchmidtKaler2003], eight years after the
publishing of the original paper, marking a first step in making quantum
computers more than a theoretical concept.

## Measuring

As for the measurement of the quantum state after computations have been
performed, we'll rely on the observation of quantum jumps between
internal energy states [@Nagourney1986]. Note that for pedagogical
purposes, we will focus on optical qubits that rely on relatively larger
energy transitions. Hyperfine qubits are measured with the same
principle, but leverage the concept of shelving to project a ground
state in to a meta-stable state (D).

Notice on figure [6](#fig:shelving) how a transition is driven with a laser pulse
from the ground state to the $D^{5/2}$ state (unlabeled) or, in other
words, a transition from the $\ket{0}$ to the $\ket{1}$ state in optical
qubits. Hyperfine qubits utilize the first energy surplus state as
$\ket{1}$. Furthermore, this forced transition is the only path for the
transition $S^{1/2}$ $\leftrightarrow$ $D^{5/2}$ to occur.

Consider that the P states are excited states, therefore when they
naturally decay to the ground state they release photons with a very
high frequency, making the ion fluorescent. However, in D states the
same doesn't occur since the transition from the P state takes a
relatively long time and the photons are released in a sporadic fashion.

<figure id="fig:shelving">
  <img src="/images/ezgif-5-78a68d49ec.jpg" style="width:50mm" />
  <figcaption>
    Valid transitions between internal energy states in a Barium ion{" "}
    <span class="citation" data-cites="uwqubit"></span>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

With all this in mind, upon shining a laser set up to drive the
transition S $\leftrightarrow$ P on our ion, if we are equipped with a
photon detector as depicted in
[7](#fig:photon capture){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:photon capture"}, we can detect its state with high
accuracy by capturing the frequency of emitted photons.

<figure id="fig:photon capture">
  <img src="/images/Screenshot_20220513_173743.png" style="width:70mm" />
  <figcaption>
    Schematic of a device capable of readout on trapped ions. A laser shines on
    the ion, causing it to scatter photons which are registered on a photon
    detector. Adapted from <span class="citation" data-cites="Bruzewicz2019"></span>
    .
  </figcaption>
</figure>

On a practical notice, using quantum jumps sprinkled with other
techniques, such as tracking photon arrival times, has achieved a
precision of circa 99.9% [@PhysRevLett.100.200502]. Making qubit readout
extremely accurate and in the order of hundreds of microseconds.

# Limitations and potential

Concluding, now that all the steps required to build a QC with trapped
ions have been explained, some considerations about their pros and cons
are required.

First of all, we should be aware that fidelity and accuracy in this
technology is considered relatively high, or similar, when compared to
other methods of quantum computing. For instance, state coherence
lifespan is in the order of minutes, much longer than the time it takes
to perform computations.

Another aspect is the accuracy that quantum gates sustain, we've
discussed that the precision for single qubit gates lies in the 99.9
percentile. Meanwhile, 2-qubit gates share the same accuracy for
hyperfine qubits, or 99.6% for optical qubits. Both, extremely
acceptable in the optics of quantum error correction. Moreover, qubit
initialization and readout are also straightforward given the current
research available. Both, having high precision techniques available,
displaying impressive 99.9% or higher percentiles.

In contrast, one disadvantage of ion trapped quantum computing may very
well be the slow (relatively) time it takes to perform 2-qubit gates.
Compared to other methods, like superconducting qubits who have measured
times in the order of nanoseconds [@kjaer], ion QCs lag behind,
performing logic gates in the magnitude of microseconds, specifically
$2.6\mu$s as per Schäfer et al. [@Schfer2018].

Finally, we should also consider that this technology is harder to scale
then competing modalities of quantum computing. While the trapping of
ions isn't necessarily a concern, the fact that they need to be
addressable poses a serious problem. Currently, we have an 127-qubit
processor made by IBM commercially available and with a rapidly
increasing qubit count in their roadmap
[@piveteau_annunziata_chow_johnson_2021]. On the other hand, one of the
most successful companies behind ion trapped quantum computers, IonQ,
claims to have properly performed single-qubit gates on chains of 79
ions, and 2-qubit gates on only 11 ion pairs [@Wright2019].

Concluding, at this point ion trapping based quantum computers can be
seen as reliable with high fidelity and accuracy, but with scaling
issues in terms of qubits and gate computation speed. With that in mind,
the competing technologies also have their problems and the optimal
medium for quantum computing hasn't come to a consensus. However, at
this point, it is remarkable enough that we have come to the point where
these technologies are becoming enterprise worthy and not a long, and
distant, dream.
